---
layout: post
title:      "Will I Ever Use Hypothesis Testing in Non-Technical Settings?"
date:       2020-02-25 03:28:48 +0000
permalink:  will_i_ever_use_hypothesis_testing_in_non-technical_settings
---


For me the sections covering probability and statistics were met with equal parts fear and the timeless question asked by any student in a learning situation: how will this material be used in the real-world? After working through the labs and other materials I found online or in texts that I purchased, I could see how statistical inference would play a vital role in the upcoming machine-learning modules. However, on a less technical level, I still did not fully understand how I would use hypothesis testing in my current role. There were many nights where I often sat by my laptop after making a major learning breakthrough where I thought that these skills could only be applied in a ‘data science’ role at a major tech company.
	In my current professional role, I work with a major administrator of benefits that assists employees from multiple Fortune 500 companies make decisions around their health benefits, and, more recently, I have taken a management role on the team responsible for managing spending accounts such as Health Savings Accounts and Health Reimbursement Accounts. Many of the agents that I supervise are tasked with taking calls from participants to either troubleshoot an issue they are having with their benefit or educate them on how to better use their benefit. While the majority of the eight teams I work with did not have any performance issues, there was one team where disunity was rampant and customer satisfaction measures were markedly lower than their peer group. As a manager, when I asked the team lead what they thought the problem was, they informed me that some individuals were having technical issues everyday that prevented them from assisting participants. While the team lead thought this was just a natural phenomenon, after reviewing the data, I noticed that three members of the eleven-person team reported technical issues daily while others rarely did or reported an issue no more than three times a week.
	With this initial finding after looking at the data and equipped with my ability to perform hypothesis test, I put what I learned to work in the real-world. After collecting the data, I used the Seaborn library to create a distribution plot and the graph clearly highlighted that there were some outliers in the distribution as I expected. During lunch on a Tuesday afternoon, I asked one of our firm’s IT specialists what is the probability of a system crashing daily. While he didn’t have a response at the time, he reported his findings later that day and informed me that the system is designed to have at most 4% downtime daily. Although this was enough information to conclude what was occurring, after running a quick one-sample T-test, I was able to determine that the probability of one’s system being down 60% of the time per day was less than 1%, I was able to collaborate with the team lead to rectify this matter.
	While one could have concluded that certain members of this team were, to borrow a phrase from Frederick Winslow Taylor, solidering, the use of statistical inference in this matter removed any personal accusations from the conversation and centered the performance conversations around the science of probability and statistics. If the person in question were confronted and either I or the team lead simply remarked that we noticed they seem to be having more computer issues than their peers and we believe that they were purposefully avoiding their work, the foundation of our argument could invite easy replies. By this, the individual in question could point to the number of tickets they have open and state that they are the unfortunate person that is always greeted with technical issues daily. However,  being able to use data compiled from the whole team of roughly 90 individuals, we were able to show that the likelihood of reproducing such robust computing issues is on par with winning the Powerball, the individual in question soon seemed to have no computer issues after I received the return receipt of the e-mail I sent their team concerning staff-wide computer issues.
	Being able to apply the concepts of hypothesis testing in this real-world example truly helped me solidify my understanding of the concepts reviewed during the modules leading up to this project. From constructing the null and alternative hypotheses to determining the type of test to run, I gained a sense of confidence that I was subsequently able to apply to designing some of the scenarios in the Module 3 project. More importantly, I garnered a respect for how such statistical tools are important in business settings and how decision-makers can use such findings to inform subsequent strategies. Like my work experience, employing statistics removed any of the personal bias from the matter at hand. The conversation didn’t devolve into one person claiming that the other was shying away from their duties. Instead, with data, we were able to communicate that this individual’s downtime was three standard deviations away from the mean of their team and explain what that meant in relationship to the rest of the team’s data. Additionally, being able to communicate that the likelihood of witnessing someone else have a similar system error rate was below 1%, it took any doubt out of what was transpiring and the problem was swiftly fixed. 
	As we begin our modules on machine learning, I predict that statistical inference will play a key role in how models make decisions based on the data they are presented with. By this, I look forward to seeing whether machine learning models incorporate hypothesis testing to predict future outcomes based on the historical likelihood of an event occurring. If the dataset I utilized for my ad hoc analysis at work was one the scale of data for a entire sector of our economy, I believe that the p-values calculated from test data will be used in machine learning to make informed decisions and predictions. I am excited to see if this inclination holds true. In the meantime, I will continue to engage in additional learning tasks that involve categorical data to further reinforce my newfound appreciation and understanding of hypothesis testing. 

